short reads QC hackathon project proposal (#3489)
nf-core/website: sites/main-site/src/content/hackathon-projects/hackathon-october-2025/metaomics_shortread_qc_subworkflow.md

---

> title: meta-omics short reads QC

Reviewer: I dont think this will necessarily be specifc to meta-omics!

You could make it broader to entice more people

category: components
intro_video: ""
slack: https://nfcore.slack.com/archives/C070369GP7T
image: "/assets/images/events/2025/hackathon-barcelona/nfcore-metaomics_logo.png"
image_alt: "nf-core/metaomics logo"
leaders:
  vagkaratzas:
    name: Evangelos Karatzas
    slack: "https://nfcore.slack.com/team/U05LNHCFLCW"
---

## Project Aim

> In the [meta-omics special interest group](https://nf-co.re/special-interest-groups/meta-omics) we started a discussion about having a standardized, general subworkflow for reads quality check (QC) in nf-core. Currently, different nf-core pipelines (and not only) use their own implementations of QC. Some modules are shared across multiple pipelines, and are used widely (e.g., fastqc -73 pipelines, fastp -22 pipelines) while others are used in fewer pipelines (e.g., trimgalore -15 pipelines, umitools_extract -10 pipelines,adapterremoval -2 pipelines, etc.). The proposed subworkflow will allow users to pick their preferred tool from a pool of nf-core QC modules or completely skip some of the QC steps. This subworkflow will treat Illumina short read inputs, but can also function as a template for a potential long reads QC subworkflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [meta-omics special interest group](https://nf-co.re/special-interest-groups/meta-omics) we started a discussion about having a standardized, general subworkflow for reads quality check (QC) in nf-core
 Currently, different nf-core pipelines (and not only) use their own implementations of essentially the same QC steps: stats, adapter clipping, paired-end merging, umi-detection deduplication etc.

For example, some modules are shared across multiple pipelines, and are used widely (e.g., fastqc -73 pipelines, fastp -22 pipelines) while others are used in fewer pipelines (e.g., trimgalore -15 pipelines, umitools_extract -10 pipelines,adapterremoval -2 pipelines, etc.).

The proposed project envisions a single Illumina short read preprocessing subworkflow that is installed and consistent across all nf-core pipelines using short read DNA data. However at the same time providing users freedom to pick their preferred tool from a pool of nf-core QC modules or completely skip some of the QC steps. 

It will also function as a template for an equivalent potential long reads QC subworkflow.
```

More information can be found on this [link](https://hackmd.io/@nf-core/S1NVXogilg).

> Anyone working on meta-omics (metagenomics, metataxonomics, metatranscriptomics, metaproteomics, metabolomics) are welcome to join!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anyone working with Illumina short read data, and particularly within meta-omics (metagenomics, metataxonomics, metatranscriptomics, metaproteomics, metabolomics), are welcome to join!
```
